=head1 NAME

aptitude-robot-session - call aptitude-robot non-interactively

=head1 SYNOPSIS

aptitude-robot-session

=head1 DESCRIPTION

aptitude-robot-session is a helper script meant to be run from cron or init scripts.  It will call aptitude-robot with some options suitable for non-interactive use.  It will also redirect all output (STDERR and STDOUT) to LOGFILE defined in C</etc/default/aptitude-robot>.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

There are a few configuration options that can be defined in C</etc/default/aptitude-robot>.

=over

=item LOGFILE

the name of the file where all the output of aptitude-robot is collected.
Defaults to C</var/log/aptitude-robot.log>

=item LOG_SESSION

the name of the file where the session log is accumulated.
aptitude-robot-session will append its PID to this file in order not to
overwrite a log file left over from a crashed earlier invocation.  If
aptitude-robot-session finishes properly it will append the session log to
LOGFILE and delete the session log.

=item SESSION_REPORT_COMMAND

optional command invoked with the session log as the only argument at the end
of an aptitude-robot-session run.  This can be used to file reports to
monitoring systems or support mail addresses.

=item MAX_LOGFILES_SIZE_BLOCKS

file size limit in blocks for the session log.  This prevents endless loops if
a package installation continues to ask the same question for which no terminal
is available to provide an answer.

=item POST_SESSION_HOOK

a command that is run at the end of a successful aptitude-robot-session.  E.g.,
use it for apt-get clean.

=back

=head1 BUGS

The non-interactive nature of aptitude-robot-session may trigger the condition
reported in https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/aptitude/+bug/257279

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<aptitude-robot(8)>, L<aptitude(8)>

=head1 AUTHORS

Elmar S. Heeb <elmar@heebs.ch> and Axel Beckert <abe@debian.org>

=cut
